Tonight, on
The Secret Life of the Brain...
WOMAN:
One weekend,
our daughter was here,
and he walked into the kitchen
and he said,
"Who are you?"
NARRATOR:
In its final decades,
the brain is faced
with a new set of challenges.
MAN:
63 years old
and can't tie your own shoes?
Isn't that ridiculous?
NARRATOR:
But it marshals
surprising powers of renewal.
MAN 2:
What makes the engine go?
Desire... desire... desire.
Tonight, "The Aging Brain."
Captioning sponsored by WNET
Major funding for
The Secret Life of the Brain
is provided by the
National Science Foundation,
America's investment
in the future.
Funding is also provided by...
At Pfizer, we're spending
nearly $5 billion
looking for the cures
of the future.
We have 12,000 scientists
and health experts
who firmly believe the only
thing incurable is our passion.
The Medtronic Foundation,
on behalf of Medtronic.
Providing lifelong solutions
for people with chronic disease.
The Park Foundation,
dedicated to education
and quality television.
The Corporation
for Public Broadcasting
and by contributions
to your PBS station from:
MAN:
I have walked through many lives
Some of them my own
And I am not who I was
Though some principle
of being abides
From which I struggle
not to stray.
NARRATOR:
The brain in old age.
In its furrows and folds dwell
the imprints of a lifetime,
the unique history
that makes us who we are--
all we know and can remember
etched in
a hundred billion neurons--
cells that can last
our entire lives.
MAN:
Neurons can live to a hundred
and twenty-some years.
What else will work
for that long
without going to the repairman
all the time?
I think what's unusual
about the aging brain
is the fact that it's built
to withstand, you know,
that many years.
Somehow these neurons
just keep going.
And neurons are up against a
potentially hostile environment.
They take hits.
NARRATOR:
In its final decades,
the brain must contend
with the slowing down
of its neural circuits
and with crippling diseases
and injuries
few younger brains ever face.
But scientists have begun
to unlock the secrets
of the aging brain.
Long thought to be defenseless
to the onslaughts of time,
the brain can marshal
surprising powers of renewal.
NARRATOR:
Three years ago,
a stroke left Kent Miller
with the left side
of his body paralyzed.
Even after months
of rehabilitation,
he still can't use
his left arm and hand.
His career as an accountant
has come to an end.
MILLER:
You know, you feel worthless.
You can't do the things
that you used to do,
physically and mentally.
And it's been a bear
for my wife, my family.
It hasn't been
too easy for me, either.
I want to become whole,
to put it simply.
I want to get my arm back.
I want to take something
in my left hand.
I want to be able
to tie my shoes.
Is that, you know...
isn't that ridiculous--
63 years old
and can't tie your own shoes?
I'm sick of Velcro.
I want shoelaces, and I want
to be able to tie them.
What about using a toothbrush
to brush your teeth?
Did you use
the affected hand
to do that?
No, I didn't do that.
You just used
your right hand.
Yeah.
When you are
getting dressed,
putting your arm
through a sleeve
of clothing,
do you actively
push your left hand
and arm through,
or do you pull it on
with your right?
I pull it on
with my right.
So that means
your left hand
just kind of,
sort of,
laid there?
Yeah.
NARRATOR:
At the University of Alabama
in Birmingham,
Kent has enrolled in a study
that may help him regain
the use of his arm.
For Mr. Miller, he's still there
very much cognitively,
but physically he would like
to have his independence back.
So we're trying to work with him
so that he can regain
some of his independence.
You know,
actually...
that's
fairly flexible.
Yeah, I know,
but I can't do it.
NARRATOR:
The stroke that left Kent
with a paralyzed left arm
struck at the part of his brain
responsible for moving the arm.
A blockage in an artery suddenly
stopped the flow of blood,
cutting off oxygen, shutting
down the flow of signals.
Millions of neurons were killed.
Millions more were injured.
The damaged part of his brain
shrank to half its former size.
Because the right side
of the brain controls
the left side of the body,
Kent's left arm and leg
were paralyzed.
MAN:
Most patients have been told,
after a stroke,
that the amount of movement
that they have at six months
or one year
is the maximum
that they're going to have
for the rest of their life.
Whatever they have
at one year, that's it
and they're not going
to get any better.
NARRATOR:
But neuroscientist Edward Taub
and his colleagues
are teaching stroke survivors
from all over the country
how to revive the stricken part
of their brains
many years after a stroke.
Let it go.
Extend that finger on out.
Good job.
There are little
spacings in here
for each individual
finger,
so you're going
to have
to push your hand
all the way in.
NARRATOR:
Taub's innovative therapy
requires Kent
to immobilize his good hand.
Oh, let's do
this again.
What it boils down to is that
you can't use the good one,
so you've got
to use the bad hand.
ALLEN:
Okay, are
you ready
to place your hand
up on the table?
NARRATOR:
Kent had written off
his left hand as useless.
Now he will discover just
how much he can do with it--
because of the resilience
of his brain.
During the past three years,
many of the injured neurons
have recovered.
But most have been recruited
by neighboring brain circuits
responsible for moving parts
of Kent's body
unaffected by the stroke.
If Kent works hard enough, he
can force his recovered neurons
to resume their old job
and send signals
to his left arm once again.
But first he has to overcome
a dependence on his right arm
that's become deeply encoded
in his brain.
TAUB:
The person could use the arm,
if he really tried,
but he just never tries.
He doesn't try
because he's learned not to try.
It's a conditioned response,
but it goes on week after week,
month after month
and as time goes on, it becomes
more and more powerful,
and eventually, it becomes
overwhelmingly powerful.
And so you've got
to counter-condition
this extremely strong tendency
not to use the arm.
I want you
to see how many
of these dominoes
you can flip over
in 30 seconds.
The key is to not
just pick them up
and drop them,
but to actually
use your fingers
and maneuver
the domino.
I know you have the ability.
And that's what I'm here to do,
to push you
to do the right thing.
Okay, let's go.
You starting
the timer?
Yes.
Ooh, try it again.
That one was two.
That's okay.
This last one you just did here,
we don't want that.
Better,
that's great.
Ooh, look!
Those fingers
are working.
NARRATOR:
What makes Taub's therapy so
effective-- and so exhausting--
is that these
small, clumsy movements
have to be endlessly repeated.
Nice.
Easy for you
to say.
NARRATOR:
Over the next two weeks,
Kent will flip hundreds
of dominoes.
TAUB:
Simply overcoming this nonuse
of the limb isn't enough.
You have to repeat movements
over and over and over again.
That's the secret.
( sighs )
Come on, fingers.
( groans )
That's all right.
Keep going.
You put grease
on this one.
( laughs )
NARRATOR:
Hundreds of Taub's patients have
seen remarkable improvement.
James Faust was a sales manager
when a stroke paralyzed
his right arm.
FAUST:
I had no use of it whatsoever.
It was just dangling.
I even had thoughts
of maybe talking to somebody
about amputation
because it was just
in my way, really.
NARRATOR:
But after two years
of paralysis,
he went to see Edward Taub,
and his life turned around.
FAUST:
Two weeks or three weeks
after that program,
we were out to eat dinner
one night.
And I looked over at my wife,
and her eyes were wide
and her mouth was agasp...
( imitates gasping )
And I said,
"What's the matter?"
And she said,
"Look at your right hand."
And I did, and in that
right hand was a steak knife.
And I was cutting up my steak
as if nothing had ever happened
to that hand.
NARRATOR:
Encouraged by his progress,
Faust continued
his exercises for years.
FAUST:
I have no problem doing anything
I want to do with my right arm.
I can drive my car.
I can tie my shoes.
I can brush my teeth.
I can shave.
I can do anything I want to do.
TAUB:
The human brain is an
enormously plastic instrument.
The amount of area of the brain
that is involved
in producing movements
or receiving sensation
keeps changing continuously,
based on the amount of use
that part of the body gets.
And it turns out that no matter
how old the person becomes--
no matter
how aged the brain is--
that plasticity
remains undiminished.
NARRATOR:
Taub has found that
after just two weeks of therapy,
the part of the brain
that controls the crippled limb
has expanded back
to its original size.
Just why is still a mystery.
TAUB:
In introductory
psychology courses
when I first went to school,
they used to say, some people
think of the brain as a muscle.
And that was invariably followed
by the professor laughing
and saying,
"The brain isn't a muscle."
Well, the fact
of the matter is...
( chuckling ):
that in the last 15 years,
what we've begun to find
is that, in a sense,
the brain is like a muscle
and the more that you
exercise it, the better it gets.
ALLEN:
Are those
good French fries?
MILLER:
Yeah, they're
pretty good.
NARRATOR:
After two weeks of therapy,
Kent Miller is eating
with his left hand
for the first time in years.
Break my neck
getting to it, though.
ALLEN:
Good, good.
That's good; good bite.
MILLER:
I know I'm a lot farther along
than I was,
because I really wouldn't use
my left hand.
When your hand gets tired,
stop, let it rest.
MILLER:
It was so much easier to use
the right, which worked normal,
and now it's...
it's almost natural
for me to use it at times--
the left side.
How's that?
That's a little
bit better.
The one thing I got
to watch
is that I don't bite
my fingers.
Yeah, because you kind
of want to keep those.
That's another thing.
It's easier
to go down after something
than, sometimes,
lift the arm and...
up to where it is.
One of the things they want me
to do is to comb my hair,
and I just can't hardly
get up there,
where I can get
to my mouth okay.
And, uh... that's neat.
In this task,
I'm going to say
some words
that are the names
of objects
and animals.
When...
Listen carefully
and when I finish,
I want you to say them
back to me
in the order of
their physical size--
so from smallest
to largest.
"Wastebasket, oven,
river,
slipper, lemon."
Slipper,
wastebasket, oven...
I don't know what the third...
what the last one
you said there.
I've forgotten it already.
NARRATOR:
While only some of us suffer
from strokes,
all of us worry our minds may
start to fail as we get older.
I'd like you to point to the
same blocks in the same order.
Here's the
first one.
NARRATOR:
This lab at the
University of Michigan
studies how age
affects mental performance.
Its director,
psychologist Denise Park,
is gathering evidence
that presents a new view
of brain aging.
Aging begins in your 20s,
as soon as you reach maturity.
Our data show clearly--
absolutely clearly--
that, um, as you age
from 20 to 30,
you're a little bit slower.
You process information
not quite as fast, um,
you can hold a little bit less
information in consciousness
and you recall a little,
tiny bit less from 20 to 30
and from 30 to 40, the same
thing and so on and so forth.
Then suddenly you're 70 and you
start really noticing, perhaps
that these continuous declines
have aggregated
and you may realize
that you're not cognitively
what you used to be.
Now, this is especially true
of memory,
and the more unfamiliar
the information,
the more trouble
you're going to have.
You're going to remember
familiar stuff,
but if I bring you in my lab
and ask you to remember
a list of words,
you're going to see
that age-related decline.
Okay, this task is
the free-recall task.
In this task, I'll
read you a list
of 12 words.
When I get to...
You should listen
carefully to the words,
and when I get
to the end,
you should recall them
back to me
in any order
that you like.
Okay?
All right.
"Line, honey, train,
"sky, puzzle, jury,
garage, doll,
wife, toast, bed, watch."
Recall.
( sighs )
Line, honey, train,
sky, doll, honey, um...
Watch, honey...
train...
I said that, didn't I?
Watch, toast, doll,
wife, honey, line...
NARRATOR:
Learning someone's name,
remembering where you
parked your car...
"Jury" comes to mind.
NARRATOR:
Why do these things get harder
as we get older?
One answer may lie in
the way new memories are formed.
For a memory to take shape,
neurons must forge
electrical and chemical links
that connect them
into a stable circuit.
For decades, scientists thought
that as the brain aged,
millions of neurons died,
making it harder
for new circuits to form.
But in the 1990s,
this long-standing theory
was found to be wrong.
One of the most remarkable
things now that we understand it
is how little nerve cell loss
there is--
how much the brain stays full
of cells that we need
in order to function normally,
and that's something that
we didn't use to know at all.
Now, this is interesting,
because it forces us, then,
to look elsewhere
for the changes in the brain
that are impacting function.
Hi, guys.
How's the cutting
going?
Great.
Are these the,
uh, brains
from Boston?
NARRATOR:
At Mount Sinai School
of Medicine in New York,
neurobiologist John Morrison
is looking for clues
in a region of the brain
where new memories are formed--
the hippocampus.
When we learn something new,
neurons in the hippocampus
forge strong connections
by sending electrochemical
messages
across the tiny gaps
between them, called "synapses."
Essential to the strength
of the connection
is the movement of electrically
charged particles of calcium
drifting through the synapses.
When the particles stream
into a neuron,
they trigger chemical changes
that make the connection
more reliable.
The calcium flows
through a molecule
that's the gateway to
the neuron-- the NMDA receptor.
MORRISON:
We know that the NMDA receptor
is critically linked to memory.
So, one of the changes that
leads to memory decline in aging
might be lower levels
of NMDA receptors.
So we have looked
for those kinds of changes.
NARRATOR:
When Morrison examined
the hippocampus of monkeys,
he found that in young animals,
a single synapse had dozens
of NMDA receptors,
but in older monkeys,
the numbers of receptors
dropped sharply.
MORRISON:
Well, it was really amazing,
because this decrease occurred
in the circuit
that leads to the ability to
learn and remember new things--
the classic form of memory
that's affected in aging.
This is, to me,
an optimistic scenario,
because now we have
a molecular target
that could potentially
be manipulated
to restore the health
of that memory circuit.
You guys can start staining
for the light microscopy.
NARRATOR:
Morrison is trying
to develop drugs
to replenish the lost receptors
and rejuvenate failing memories.
So that will give us
a receptor
and a presynaptic
marker.
NARRATOR:
But the brain,
scientists are learning,
has ways to rejuvenate itself.
93-year-old Milton Adamson
has exercised regularly
since he was 42.
On memory tests, he does as well
as people half his age.
I feel that the mind, uh,
does not lose its ability
as quickly if you exercise.
ALBERT:
We never used to think
that physical activity
was good for the brain
until really very recently
and there was a large study
that was done
where they took over
1,000 people in the community
and looked at the things
that predicted what helped them
maintain mental ability,
and it turned out that physical
activity was one of them.
ADAMSON ( on phone ):
Yeah, well,
we'll get
involved with that
in the next week or so,
because I just got a call today
from Burns Nugent, uh, asking me
to be present
at the next meeting,
which is a week from Thursday.
NARRATOR:
Milton has been tested
at the University of California
at Irvine,
where scientists are searching
for the biochemical keys
to successful aging.
MAN:
The biggest revolution is,
we've gone
from describing
what's going wrong
to getting deep down
into the mechanisms
to tell what can you do about it
and how can you put more quality
into the life of a neuron.
NARRATOR:
Carl Cotman theorized
that exercise might help
to keep neurons healthy
by boosting production
of vital brain proteins.
To test his theory,
he compared two groups of rats.
While one group sat idly
in their cages,
the other group
spent hours a day running.
COTMAN:
They jump into
these running wheels
and they go like gangbusters
around
and they even do little tricks
in the running wheels.
And then you say, "Well,
what happens to the brain now?"
NARRATOR:
After eight days, Cotman found
that in the running rats,
levels of a protein that helps
neurons grow, called "BDNF,"
had doubled in a part of the
brain that's critical to memory.
COTMAN:
The surprising bottom line
is that exercise will induce
all kinds of wonderful molecules
that keep neurons healthier,
they keep them stronger.
They're basically
molecular fertilizer,
and running actually increases
these molecules in the brain.
NARRATOR:
As knowledge of
the aging brain deepens,
a new portrait is emerging
of an organ that's resilient
and resourceful,
whose lifetime of experience
may provide it
with a unique advantage.
PARK:
Younger people seek out
more information,
and that's what they're good at.
They're good at processing
and seeking information.
Older people are good at mulling
over situations, reflecting
and using and drawing
upon their experiences,
and I think that's
what wisdom is.
( crowd applauding, whistling )
NARRATOR:
Stanley Kunitz
is America's poet laureate.
Still writing
and reading his poems,
a mentor to younger poets,
he is 95 years old.
KUNITZ:
"How shall the heart
be reconciled
"to its feast of losses?
"In a rising wind,
the manic dust of my friends,
"Those who fell along the way,
bitterly stings my face.
"Yet I turn, I turn,
exulting somewhat
"With my will intact to go,
wherever I need to go,
and every stone on the road
precious to me."
WOMAN:
Mr. Kunitz, that was
absolutely wonderful.
There we are
and here's your lovely pen.
Thank you.
MAN:
We were really in the woods
20 years ago.
We didn't understand
the fundamental nature
of brain aging.
We thought that to get senile--
to sort of lose your marbles
as you got older--
was just a normal part of life.
That's really not
how brain aging works.
There was such a great pulse
of affection coming back
from that audience,
it was hard to resist.
And I loved hearing
about your mother.
Stanley, if all
of my patients
were like you,
I'd be starving.
I've been thinking
about you.
KUNITZ:
Sometimes a name slips you.
That seems to be the most...
or you don't remember
where you put something down.
Little, occasional bits
of memory, um, vanish
from the screen.
On the other hand, some memories
go deeper than ever before.
They are profoundly embedded
in your whole psychic structure.
They form a constellation
that is at the center
of your imagination.
"Summer is late, my heart.
"Words plucked out of the air
some forty years ago
"When I was wild with love
and torn almost in two
"scatter like leaves this night
of whistling wind and rain.
It is my heart that's late,
it is my song that's flown."
TAUB:
Some people's brains
will age slowly,
some will age more rapidly.
A big factor is the genetic
factor-- what's built in.
The other factor
is the maintenance of activity,
and if the aging person
remains active,
there's ample evidence
to indicate
that his intellectual
functioning
will decrease
at a much slower rate
and maybe not decrease at all.
KUNITZ:
Poetry is an exercise of the
spirit... the spirit within one,
and every time you exercise it,
you increase your vitality.
INTERVIEWER:
Most people
aren't poets.
They may
enjoy poetry...
So what do they do
if they're not poets
to stay vital
and connected
and as alive
as you are?
To care about the life, to care
about others, to remain active.
For example, you plant a seed,
you cultivate the soil,
you watch it flower.
You're participating in an
ancient ritual of life itself.
"I kneeled to the crickets
trilling underfoot
"as if about to burst
from their crusty shells;
"and like a child again
marveled to hear so clear
"and brave a music pour
from such a small machine.
"What makes the engine go?
Desire, desire, desire."
NARRATOR:
As scientists learn more
about how the aging brain works,
they are overturning some
of the central dogmas
of neuroscience itself.
For decades, neuroscientists
believed that neurons
in a fully developed brain
never reproduce themselves
and can never be replaced.
MAN:
The idea was that the brain
is a very complex structure.
It's involved in learning
and memory
and storing large... large
amounts of information.
And if you were adding
new neurons
into the circuit over time,
it would somehow disrupt
the function of the brain.
NARRATOR:
But in 1998 at the Salk
Institute in California,
neuroscientist Fred Gage
and his colleagues
discovered that even
into old age,
the human brain continues
producing new neurons.
Like the neurons
that form a baby's brain,
they are created
by the division of stem cells--
the seeds from which the tissues
of the body grow.
Everybody was astonished
that our brain makes
new nerve cells late in life.
The assumption was
that you had all the nerve
cells you were going to have
when you were younger,
and then you would lose them
and you would never be able
to replace them.
NARRATOR:
Stem cells in an embryonic brain
are wildly prolific,
producing hundreds
of different kinds of neurons,
enabling us to see, smell,
walk, think, remember.
But in an adult brain,
very few neurons are produced.
Most stem cells
mysteriously stay inactive.
As neuroscientists look
to the future,
they have begun asking if
these stem cells can be directed
to make neurons to replace those
killed by injury or disease.
SELKOE:
And that's very exciting,
because it opens up the idea
that the brain is not
this fixed machine
for which there are
no replacement parts.
Look at my fingers
where they're almost
touching.
NARRATOR:
At Harvard Medical School
in Boston,
Dr. Jeffrey Macklis works
with patients
with neurological disorders.
48-year-old Sally Carlson
has Parkinson's disease...
Okay, look over
at the frame again.
NARRATOR:
...which typically begins
in middle age
and grows steadily worse
as a person gets older.
Now, can you open
your eyes again
and walk over there?
Can you do it
on the tightrope?
NARRATOR:
Deep inside her brain
in a region
that coordinates movements,
thousands of neurons
are slowly dying.
( pills rattling )
Sally's body
is starting to feel stiff.
Her hands sometimes tremble.
CARLSON:
Folding clothes
is probably the worst thing
in that it's a constant reminder
because obviously
with three kids,
I'm folding a lot of clothes.
But I can't shake things
anymore.
I can't shake a pillow
into a pillowcase.
I can't...
Just pulling up
is a very difficult thing to do.
I think you're in shock
when you first find
something like this out.
I was scared to death.
And I know I'm not dying,
but part of me is dying.
There's no doubt about that.
I love you.
NARRATOR:
Macklis can relieve
some of Sally's symptoms
with medications,
but not forever.
MACKLIS:
Ultimately, ten or 20 years
down the road,
there are going to be
enough neurons that have died
that no combination of medicines
is going to be fully effective.
Now, how about doing
the patting on this side?
MACKLIS:
She's understood from
the very beginning that our goal
is to get her through
the childhood of her children
to their graduations
and weddings,
uh, before we start losing
the efficacy of the drugs
that we currently have.
Now, can you put
your fingers...
your hands out,
palms straight up
and spread your
fingers apart?
NARRATOR:
By the time Sally
reaches her 60s,
she may have trouble
even walking.
And then back
to where they are.
NARRATOR:
But Macklis hopes that someday
science can develop a treatment
to restore her lost abilities
by tapping the potential
of stem cells.
Different.
NARRATOR:
Macklis is not only a doctor,
he's a research scientist.
Yeah, these are normal
adult sections.
MACKLIS:
If there's a possibility
to replace
and interconnect new neurons
within circuitry
that's imperfect,
that gives a whole
different view
toward repair
of the nervous system.
For an individual animal,
they ran two different...
NARRATOR:
To identify the forces
that trigger stem cells
to become neurons,
in 1999 Macklis
and his colleagues
launched an ambitious
experiment.
They targeted the most recently
evolved part of the brain--
the cerebral cortex.
In tests with mice,
they injected a chemical,
killing thousands of neurons.
But within weeks,
the decimated neural circuits
received some unexpected
reinforcements--
a stream of stem cells.
MACKLIS:
They moved to exactly
the right location,
they turned into the right kind
of neurons
and most strikingly, some of
them could send long connections
to the correct targets.
In other words, they rebuilt
circuitry in the brain.
NARRATOR:
For the first time,
scientists had shown
that a living brain might
be able to repair itself
with new neurons.
But it may take decades
before scientists know
if neuron replacement will ever
be effective in people.
MACKLIS:
Lots more work to get there,
lots of work in the laboratory,
in animal models.
But what these experiments
clearly tell us
is that there exists
some sequence
and some combination
of molecular signals
that can induce the birth
of new nerve cells,
and by finding out what
these molecules are in mice,
we might be able to find out
what the proper molecules
are for humans.
NARRATOR:
The same mysterious forces
that propel stem cells
to build the baby's brain
may one day be harnessed
to mend the aging brain.
CARLSON:
I am extremely hopeful
and would want to be
the first human
following the last rat
or mice, whatever it is.
We have such incredible
abilities as human beings
that I believe in miracles
and I have no intention
of quitting
before the miracle happens.
WOMAN:
I'll wait till
you finish it.
Then I'll
ask you, okay?
NARRATOR:
While Parkinson's disease
cripples the body,
the most widespread disease
of the aging brain
is one that cripples the mind.
These men and women
in a California day center
can still express themselves
with pictures.
But the parts of their brains
that put thoughts into words
are slowly dying.
They have Alzheimer's disease.
Alvin Johnson was running
an insurance company
when he began having problems
with his memory eight years ago.
WOMAN:
He can no longer sign his name.
He doesn't know the date,
the day, the time.
One weekend our daughter
was here
and he walked into the kitchen
and he said, "Who are you?"
MAN:
Alzheimer's disease is almost
a uniquely human disorder,
because the areas of the brain
most recently developed
through evolution
that are important for thinking
and memory and reasoning
are the most vulnerable.
It's a tragic illness.
It robs an individual,
ultimately,
of his own qualities
that make him human.
That was loose.
You can set it down
if you want, Kate.
Don't have to hold it.
NARRATOR:
Chuck Hiatt,
a retired aircraft engineer,
was always good
at fixing things.
But two years ago,
when he was 67,
his wife and daughter
began noticing a change.
You're sitting around
not doing anything.
NARRATOR:
He was having trouble
coordinating details
or remembering what he'd done.
The Hiatts want to know if
Chuck's continuing difficulties
are just a normal part of aging
or the early signs
of Alzheimer's disease.
Oh, my... yeah!
NARRATOR:
Unfortunately, the only
conclusive proof of Alzheimer's
comes after death,
from analysis of brain tissue.
You know, it would be great if
we had a test that would tell us
whether somebody
has Alzheimer's disease--
take an image of the brain
or take a blood test
or even if we had a reliable
test of the spinal fluid,
something to tell us
absolutely certain you have it
or you don't.
We don't have that test.
So the way we make the diagnosis
is based upon information from
the examination of the patient
and information from the family
about how the person
has changed.
We're here to talk
about your husband.
Tell me what you've noticed
about his memory.
Well, I guess
to start with, um,
he just can't remember
short-term things.
A lot of repetition is required
in telling him
something.
Does he depend more
on you for help?
He depends on me for help.
And that's a change
from before?
Yes, big change.
Big change.
I mean, he was an engineer,
he was a problem solver
and, um, that just
is not what it was.
Wait a minute
now, hon.
Hon...
Hmm?
You want to use this?
It cuts real well.
You hold it up
and I'm going to rip.
How's that?
Nope, now we got
it stuck again.
Yeah, it has to be...
okay.
MORRIS:
It might be difficult
to convince a casual observer
that he has lost memory
and thinking ability
without the background
from his wife.
Certainly his family
is concerned about his decline.
Tell me about
your memory.
Any problems
with memory?
Uh, definitely.
I end up, uh,
forgetting things.
I'll, uh, not...
Dottie will
say something to me
and half-hour later
or something,
I can't remember
what she said.
Are these important
things or...
No, sometimes they may be
but most times it's not--
just conversation.
She was telling
me something.
I guess I'd
like to hear
a little bit more
about it from you
about the Rams.
You're a football fan,
I understand.
You enjoy the games?
Oh, yes.
What's the last game
that you attended?
Uh, Rams versus 49ers.
49ers.
They won 41 to... No, 21 to...
No, it was 41 to 20,
something like that.
But I'm not sure of that.
I think that's what it was,
or maybe 20 something.
Now, who's the coach
of the Rams?
Now, that I don't know.
Mmm, I'll think of it,
maybe, but right now...
MORRIS:
Well, if it
comes to you,
let me know
a little bit later.
Sir, I want
to ask you
some questions
just to test
different things
about memory
and so forth.
Some of these
questions may
be easy,
some may
be a little
more difficult.
Tell me what year
it is now.
Hmm.
I'd say 19... 96?
I don't know.
96...
What month is it?
Uh.
And you can guess,
you can guess.
April.
Subtract 3 from 20,
and then keep
subtracting 3
from each new number,
all the way down.
HIATT:
20, 17, 14, 11.
Eight.
6... no, 7... no, 5, 2.
You did very well.
I didn't think too well.
You took
a little while
to get there,
but you got there.
MORRIS:
Most people, when you say
"Alzheimer's disease,"
get a mental image
of an incapacitated patient,
almost, perhaps, ready
for the nursing home.
But people don't,
overnight, change
from healthy,
functioning, older adult
to a nursing home patient.
There's a gradual change.
You know,
I don't know
how confident
you are
about
remembering
things
like the players
and the coach.
I bet, a few
years ago,
you would have
known that
without
any problem
whatsoever
and now
you can't come
up with it
when
you need it.
So I think
that kind
of memory
disturbance
is not part
of normal aging.
It is not part
of aging.
I think it is
a memory decline
caused by disease.
And the disease
that most often
affects us
as we get older
in this day
and age,
I would say that
almost always,
that's
Alzheimer's
disease.
And it should
be treated,
because now
there are drugs
that help
stabilize things
where they are.
Now, there aren't
any drugs
that will cure it.
We don't have those,
certainly, now,
but compared
to where we were
even five
years ago,
there has been
a tremendous amount
of advance,
and we hope
that that pace
will continue.
DOTTIE:
We sure do.
I do, too.
For my sake, anyway,
and other people
that's going to follow me.
Right.
Because it's hell when
you can't remember things.
WOMAN:
Here, I'll replicate it.
COTMAN:
Yeah, see, and then this is
a really diffuse deposit, here.
WOMAN:
Here's a good
diffuse one.
COTMAN:
This is actually representative
of almost all three stages,
isn't it?
NARRATOR:
In labs all across the world,
neuroscientists are closing in
on the mystery
that has baffled them
for nearly a century:
What causes Alzheimer's disease?
Alzheimer's disease
ravages the brain,
killing billions of neurons,
leaving in its wake
dark, twisted filaments
called tangles
and large, sticky masses
called plaques.
For decades, scientists had
no idea where they came from.
SELKOE:
It took so long to figure out
the beginnings
of Alzheimer's disease
because the brain scientists--
who understood
what Alzheimer's looked like
under the microscope--
didn't think
that these plaques and tangles
were going to turn out to be
the key to the disease.
They thought they were
tombstones of the process.
NARRATOR:
But in the 1980s,
scientists took advantage
of new technologies
to look more closely.
They began to suspect
that tangles and plaques
were more than just tombstones--
they were killers.
Neurons depend
for their survival
on long chains of molecules
arrayed like railroad tracks
that transport nourishment
across the cell.
What keeps the tracks stable
are short strips of protein
called tau
that work like railroad ties.
In Alzheimer's disease,
the tau mysteriously starts
to curl and tangle,
causing the strands of molecules
to separate and collapse.
These things become twisted,
and they just don't transport
very well.
You know, it's like somebody
took the train track
and went... eeyah!
You know, try and get a train
to run along that.
It can't-- it falls off.
If the material can't get
where it needs to be,
the cell is really going
to collapse
and eventually die.
Looking at the cell
late in the course
of Alzheimer's disease,
you see a cell that's literally
choked with tangles of tau.
Now, tangle formation
is a long, slow process.
That may be a very good thing,
because if we could interfere
with tangle formation
early in the disease,
what we may be able to do
is prevent the progression
of the disease.
NARRATOR:
Neuroscientist
Peter Davies thinks
he may have found
one of the triggers
that causes tangles to form--
a protein inside the neuron
called PIN 1.
DAVIES:
It binds to tau and bends tau,
actually changes
the shape of tau.
What we would like to do
is to test the idea
that if we block the effect...
action of PIN 1 on tau,
we'll actually stop
the tau becoming abnormal
and becoming tangled tau.
NARRATOR:
Davies has begun work
developing a drug to stop PIN 1.
But while he and others
take aim at tangles,
another group of scientists
is targeting plaques.
In the spaces between neurons
drift thousands
of molecules of protein.
In an Alzheimer's brain,
some of them
are suspicious protein fragments
called beta amyloid.
Sticky and resilient, bits
of beta amyloid clump together
to form an expanding mass
called a plaque,
which attaches itself
like a barnacle
to the outside of the neuron.
Sensing a hostile invader,
the brain's defensive cells
fight back,
releasing powerful chemicals.
But the counterattack backfires.
The chemicals set off
a series of reactions
that slowly destroy the neuron.
When the brain tries to defend
itself from beta amyloid,
it seems to not get it
quite right.
It seems to cause
even more of a mess.
NARRATOR:
As the damage spreads,
more and more neurons die,
leaving whole regions of
the brain infested with plaques.
It doesn't
perfectly co-migrate
with any
of the other bands.
So it's a little bit
tough to say.
So these
are her stable
transfectants?
NARRATOR:
Scientists
like Dennis Selkoe theorize
that lowering the amount
of beta amyloid in the brain
may prevent Alzheimer's disease,
just as lowering levels
of cholesterol
prevents heart disease.
SELKOE:
The trouble is
that it's not so easy,
because, number one,
the theory might be wrong--
it's a hypothesis, not a fact--
and number two,
even if it's right,
it may be trouble
to lower amyloid.
It may cause side effects.
But experimental work
that's been done
in many laboratories worldwide
supports
this hypothesis strongly.
And the proof will come
from lowering beta amyloid
in people
and watching their Alzheimer's
get better.
NARRATOR:
In a pharmaceutical lab
near San Francisco,
neuroscientist Dale Schenk has
taken a step toward that goal
with a strategy
that surprised many scientists.
SCHENK:
The novelty was to use
the immune system
to treat Alzheimer's disease--
to try to tell
the immune system, in fact,
that this plaque material
in the brain is foreign
and our immune system
needs to get rid of it.
NARRATOR:
Schenk developed a vaccine
made from beta amyloid itself
and tested it
on genetically engineered mice
bred to develop plaques like
those in Alzheimer's disease.
Well, as it turned out,
to our huge surprise,
when we immunized them
from a young age onward,
and then looked at an old age--
when they should have a lot
of plaque lesions--
they had almost none.
Their brain
was almost entirely perfect.
NARRATOR:
Encouraged by his findings,
Schenk wondered
if the vaccine
might eliminate plaques
that had already formed
in older mice.
He vaccinated one group
of older mice
but left a control group
untreated.
He found that the brains
of the mice in the control group
were ravaged by plaque,
but the brains
of the vaccinated mice
had almost no plaques at all.
In the beginning,
I was skeptical.
And then I saw the data.
And the data are very good,
and they're very persuasive.
And that's
why everybody's very excited.
NARRATOR:
But establishing the safety
and effectiveness of the vaccine
and other new treatments
for Alzheimer's
will require years of testing.
HIATT:
I'm hoping at least I can
hang on long enough
that somebody can make
a breakthrough to figure out
how to take care of this stuff.
Right now, I really
don't have much fear.
I think that what concern,
though, is the future--
what's five years from now,
or ten years from now.
HIATT:
Okay, I'm not going
to cut any more today.
Enough.
ALBERT:
I really thought that in my
lifetime, I wouldn't see
effective treatments
for Alzheimer's disease.
And I believe now
that in my lifetime I will.
DOTTIE:
Let me start here
on this end, please?
HIATT:
Okay.
KUNITZ:
In my darkest night
When the moon was covered
And I roamed through wreckage
A nimbus-clouded voice
Directed me:
"Live in the layers
Not on the litter."
Though I lack the art
to decipher it,
no doubt the next chapter
in my book of transformations
Is already written.
I am not done with my changes.
Take a 3-D animated tour
of the brain
at PBS Online.
Find brain teasers,
take a cognitive test and more
at pbs.org.